\input texinfo  @c -*- mode: texinfo; coding: utf-8 -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename org-todo-letter-number-priorities.info
@settitle org-todo-letter-number-priorities @value{VERSION}
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@set VERSION 0.2.0
@set UPDATED 2026-05-16
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for org-todo-letter-number-priorities, version
@value{VERSION}, last updated @value{UPDATED}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Blaine Mooers.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.
@end quotation

The org-todo-letter-number-priorities Emacs Lisp package is free
software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of
the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* org-todo-letter-number-priorities: (org-todo-letter-number-priorities). Letter+number TODO priorities for Org-mode.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title org-todo-letter-number-priorities
@subtitle Letter+number TODO priorities for Org-mode
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@author Blaine Mooers @email{blaine-mooers@@ou.edu}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top org-todo-letter-number-priorities

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                What this package does and why.
* Installation::                Manual install, straight.el, use-package.
* Concepts::                    Priority cookies and headline format.
* Commands::                    Interactive commands.
* Customization::               User options.
* The tasks.org File::          Structure and section dates.
* Section Dates::               How SCHEDULED dates are computed.
* SQLite Project Database::     Schema, detection, and backends.
* Tag Insertion::               How project tags merge into Org tags.
* Keybindings::                 Suggested key map.
* Testing::                     Running the ERT suite.
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex introduction
@cindex Org-mode

@code{org-todo-letter-number-priorities} provides letter+number
priority cookies for Org-mode TODOs.  A prioritized headline takes
the form:

@example
** TODO [A1] task description :tag:
@end example

A single space is required between the keyword @code{TODO} and the
left square bracket of the priority cookie.  @code{X} is an uppercase
letter that names a priority group and @code{Y} is a non-negative
integer that ranks the item inside the group; smaller @code{Y} means
higher priority.  Org-mode picks up the literal @code{TODO} keyword
in agenda views; the @code{[XY]} cookie is plain text from Org's
point of view, so it does not interfere with Org's own @code{[#A]}
priority system.

The package is self-contained.  It depends only on Emacs and Org and
manages its own SQLite project lookup for the optional tagging
feature.

It also manages a structured @file{tasks.org} file with eleven
top-level sections that organize tasks by time horizon and provides a
command that adds @code{SCHEDULED} lines to each TODO based on its
parent section.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@cindex installation
@cindex Makefile
@cindex install-info

@section Manual install with the Makefile

Clone or copy the source tree, then:

@example
make compile
make info
sudo make install
@end example

@noindent
By default the package installs into
@file{/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp/org-todo-letter-number-priorities}
and the info file into @file{/usr/local/share/info}.  Override
@code{PREFIX}, @code{ELISPDIR}, or @code{INFODIR} on the command line
to install elsewhere:

@example
make install PREFIX=$HOME/.local
@end example

@noindent
After install, add the install directory to @code{load-path} and call
@code{require}:

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path
  "/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp/org-todo-letter-number-priorities")
(require 'org-todo-letter-number-priorities)
@end lisp

@section straight.el

@lisp
(straight-use-package
 '(org-todo-letter-number-priorities
   :type git
   :host github
   :repo "blaine-mooers/org-todo-letter-number-priorities"))
@end lisp

@section use-package with straight

@lisp
(use-package org-todo-letter-number-priorities
  :straight (org-todo-letter-number-priorities
             :type git
             :host github
             :repo "blaine-mooers/org-todo-letter-number-priorities")
  :after org
  :commands (oltp-prioritize-region
             oltp-strip-region
             oltp-sort-region
             oltp-add-project-tag
             oltp-tag-region
             oltp-init-tasks-file
             oltp-schedule-tasks-file)
  :custom
  (oltp-tasks-file "~/org/tasks.org")
  (oltp-db-path "~/60003TimeTracking/cb/tenKprojects.db"))
@end lisp

@node Concepts
@chapter Concepts

@cindex priority cookie
@cindex group letter

A @dfn{priority cookie} is the bracketed text @code{[XY]} that follows
the @code{TODO} keyword on an Org headline.

@table @asis
@item @code{X}, the @dfn{group letter}
A single uppercase letter from @code{A} through @code{Z}.

@item @code{Y}, the @dfn{rank}
A non-negative integer.  Smaller means higher priority.  @code{Y} may
have one or more digits.  Sorting is numerical, so @code{C2} outranks
@code{C10} which outranks @code{C100}.
@end table

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

@cindex commands

@deffn Command oltp-prioritize-region beg end
Add @code{TODO [XY]} cookies to every @code{**+} headline between
@var{beg} and @var{end}.  Blank lines start a new priority group, so
the first contiguous block of headlines becomes @code{A1}, @code{A2},
@code{A3}, the next block becomes @code{B1}, @code{B2}, and so on.
Headlines that already carry @code{TODO} or a @code{[XY]} cookie are
normalized first, so the command is idempotent.  Non-headline content
lines between headlines (for example @code{SCHEDULED} lines, drawers,
body text) do not break a group and do not consume a priority slot.
@end deffn

@deffn Command oltp-strip-region beg end
Remove @code{[XY]} cookies from every Org headline in the region.
The @code{TODO} keyword is preserved.
@end deffn

@deffn Command oltp-sort-region beg end
Sort @code{**+} subtrees in the region by @code{[XY]} priority.  Each
subtree, from its @code{**+} line up to (but not including) the next
@code{*} or @code{**+} headline, moves as a unit so @code{SCHEDULED}
lines and body text follow their headline.  Level-1 @code{*}
headlines act as section boundaries and stay in place, so sorting
across the whole @file{tasks.org} file re-orders items inside each
@code{* Do it @dots{}} section independently.  Subtrees without a
cookie sort to the end of their section in original relative order.
@end deffn

@deffn Command oltp-add-project-tag
Append an Org tag to the current headline.  The project name is read
from the SQLite database referenced by @code{oltp-db-path} through
@code{completing-read}, sanitized into an Org-compatible tag, and
applied through @code{org-set-tags} so existing tags and alignment
are preserved.  Signals an error when point is not on a headline.
@end deffn

@deffn Command oltp-tag-region beg end
Walk the region and prompt for a project tag once per @code{**+}
headline.  Non-headline lines are skipped.
@end deffn

@deffn Command oltp-init-tasks-file &optional force
Create the @file{tasks.org} file at @code{oltp-tasks-file},
pre-populated with the eleven top-level headlines from
@code{oltp-tasks-file-headlines}.  With prefix argument @var{force},
an existing file is overwritten.  Without @var{force}, an existing
file signals an error.
@end deffn

@deffn Command oltp-schedule-tasks-file
Walk @code{oltp-tasks-file} and add (or replace) a @code{SCHEDULED:}
line under each @code{** TODO} based on the parent @code{*} section.
Sections that have no entry in @code{oltp-section-date-functions} are
skipped silently.  Safe to re-run; existing @code{SCHEDULED} lines
are replaced rather than duplicated.
@end deffn

@deffn Command oltp-prioritize-and-schedule-tasks-file
Convenience command equivalent to @code{oltp-schedule-tasks-file}.
Prioritization remains a manual, region-based operation because
priority groups follow blank-line breaks rather than the parent
section.
@end deffn

@node Customization
@chapter Customization

@cindex customization

@defopt oltp-tasks-file
Absolute path to the tasks file managed by this package.  Both the
directory and the file name are part of this option, so you can keep
@file{tasks.org} wherever you like.

Default: @file{~/tasks.org}.
@end defopt

@defopt oltp-tasks-file-headlines
Top-level headlines written by @code{oltp-init-tasks-file}.  The
order is significant.  Each entry should have a corresponding entry
in @code{oltp-section-date-functions} so that
@code{oltp-schedule-tasks-file} can pick a @code{SCHEDULED} date for
the TODOs under it.

Default: a list of eleven names ranging from
@code{"Do it today"} to @code{"Do it next year"}.
@end defopt

@defopt oltp-org-todo-keyword
Org keyword used in front of the priority cookie.

Default: @code{"TODO"}.
@end defopt

@defopt oltp-db-path
Absolute path to the SQLite database that holds project metadata.

Default: @file{~/60003TimeTracking/cb/tenKprojects.db}.
@end defopt

@defopt oltp-db-table
Table inside @code{oltp-db-path} that holds the project rows.  When
@code{nil}, the package walks every table in the database and picks
the first one whose schema includes a column named by
@code{oltp-db-column}.

Default: @code{nil} (auto-detect).
@end defopt

@defopt oltp-db-column
Column name to read project names from.

Default: @code{"ProjectDirectory"}.
@end defopt

@defopt oltp-tag-use-basename
When non-@code{nil}, the Org tag is built from the basename of the
project path returned by the database.  When @code{nil}, the full
path is sanitized into a tag.

Default: @code{t}.
@end defopt

@defopt oltp-section-date-functions
Alist mapping a section headline name to a zero-argument function
returning an Emacs time value.  @code{oltp-schedule-tasks-file} uses
the returned time as the @code{SCHEDULED} date for every TODO under
the matching section.

Default entries map each of the eleven standard headlines to a
reasonable target date.  See @ref{Section Dates}.
@end defopt

@node The tasks.org File
@chapter The tasks.org File

@cindex tasks.org

@code{oltp-init-tasks-file} writes a file with the structure:

@example
#+TITLE: Tasks
#+STARTUP: showall
#+LaTeX_HEADER: \usepackage[margin=0.5in]@{geometry@}

* Do it today

* Do it this week

* Do it next week

* Do it later this month

* Do it next month

* Do it in two months

* Do it in three months

* Do it in four months

* Do it in five months

* Do it in six months

* Do it next year
@end example

@noindent
Add @code{**} subheadings under each section.  Once a section has its
items in declining priority order, select that region and run
@code{oltp-prioritize-region}.  Blank lines start a new priority
group inside the region.

To assign @code{SCHEDULED} dates to every TODO in the file at once,
run @code{oltp-schedule-tasks-file}.

@node Section Dates
@chapter Section Dates

@cindex SCHEDULED
@cindex section dates

The default mappings in @code{oltp-section-date-functions}:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.35 0.65
@headitem Section @tab Scheduled date
@item Do it today @tab today
@item Do it this week @tab today + 6 days
@item Do it next week @tab today + 13 days
@item Do it later this month @tab last day of this month
@item Do it next month @tab first day of next month
@item Do it in two months @tab today + 2 months (day clamped to 28)
@item Do it in three months @tab today + 3 months
@item Do it in four months @tab today + 4 months
@item Do it in five months @tab today + 5 months
@item Do it in six months @tab today + 6 months
@item Do it next year @tab January 1 of next year
@end multitable

@noindent
To change a mapping, set the relevant cdr in
@code{oltp-section-date-functions} to a function of no arguments that
returns an Emacs time value, or replace the alist outright in your
init file.

@node SQLite Project Database
@chapter SQLite Project Database

@cindex SQLite
@cindex tenKprojects.db
@cindex backend

The package prefers the built-in @code{sqlite} library shipped with
Emacs 29 or newer compiled with @code{--with-sqlite3}.  When the
built-in library is unavailable, the package falls back to the
@command{sqlite3} command-line shell.  Either backend is enough.

The default expected schema looks like:

@example
CREATE TABLE projects (
    id               INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    ProjectDirectory TEXT
);
@end example

@noindent
The table name is not significant when @code{oltp-db-table} is
@code{nil}; the package detects whichever table contains the
@code{ProjectDirectory} column.  If you keep your projects in a
different column, set @code{oltp-db-column}.  If multiple tables
contain that column, set @code{oltp-db-table} explicitly to pin
detection.

Project names are de-duplicated and sorted before they are presented
to @code{completing-read}.

@node Tag Insertion
@chapter Tag Insertion

@cindex tags

@code{oltp-add-project-tag} delegates to @code{org-set-tags}, so:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The new tag is added to the existing tag list rather than appended as
a separate block.
@item
Org's tag alignment column is respected.
@item
The command is idempotent: re-running with the same project does not
duplicate the tag.
@end itemize

The project name returned by @code{oltp--read-project} is sanitized
into an Org-compatible tag by replacing every character outside
@samp{[A-Za-z0-9_@@%]} with an underscore.

@node Keybindings
@chapter Keybindings

@cindex keybindings

The package does not bind any keys by default.  The following bindings
are a reasonable starting point.

@lisp
(define-key org-mode-map (kbd "C-c j p") #'oltp-prioritize-region)
(define-key org-mode-map (kbd "C-c j s") #'oltp-strip-region)
(define-key org-mode-map (kbd "C-c j o") #'oltp-sort-region)
(define-key org-mode-map (kbd "C-c j t") #'oltp-add-project-tag)
(define-key org-mode-map (kbd "C-c j T") #'oltp-tag-region)
(define-key org-mode-map (kbd "C-c j i") #'oltp-init-tasks-file)
(define-key org-mode-map (kbd "C-c j d") #'oltp-schedule-tasks-file)
@end lisp

@node Testing
@chapter Testing

@cindex testing
@cindex ERT

Run the test suite from the source directory:

@example
make test
@end example

@noindent
The Makefile invokes Emacs in batch mode and loads the test file with
mocked @code{oltp--read-project} so the project picker is exercised
without a real database, while the SQLite-specific tests build a
temporary database with the @command{sqlite3} command-line tool (or
the built-in library) to validate the project-name lookup end to
end.  Date-helper tests pin @code{current-time} to a fixed reference
moment so they are deterministic.

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

This documentation is distributed under the terms of the GNU Free
Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by
the Free Software Foundation.  See
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.html} for the full text.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
